Good morning, everybody. It's very good to have you here.
How are you?
Jim Caron Osborne and Hayden Wainow and Dr Barbara Disley.
I'll let you introduce yourselves as well, but I understand we have you here for two hours today.
I'll let you open up with some introductory remarks,
such as an introduction, and then I'll have the two members to ask questions over to you.
Thank you for making the time.
Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to allow us to present our last year's work, and perhaps
a look into what we're looking into in the future.
As many of you will know that we were set up following the inquiry into mental health and
addiction back in 2018, and we came into form in February 21. So six years of existence
at the time, the Commission was set up to be a force for change, helping to lead a shift
to a mental health wellbeing system that is accountable and is experienced as joined up,
respectful, responsive, by tongue to fire order, their families, and whānau.
The system is serving a population now that is poorer in mental health and wellbeing,
an increasing need for mental health support compared to six years ago.
There have been improvements. More staff in place due to filling vacancies
has been a key driver to improve access rates and reduced wait times.
Over 236,000 people have seen access to the Access and Choice Program in 2024,
but less than the expected target of 325,000 per annum. However, for young people,
access to specialist mental health services reduced, they faced longer wait times,
had more referrals, declined. This is particularly concerning given the rate of psychological
distress that is increasing for young people. In 2024 and 25, was the coming over age for
Te Hiringa Mahata? Our system performance monitor showed a system new linking outcomes for people
with contributions from the Government. Our first system performance monitoring report outlined
what a good mental health and addiction system looks like. The report shows that while there are
pockets of positive change, there is a significant way to go to achieve the outcomes people expect.
Our annual stakeholder engagement survey told us there is an overall positive
deception of Te Hiringa Mahata. Stakeholders rated us highly on our engagement,
reliability of advice, reports and information that we publish, and speaking up on important
mental health, addiction and wellbeing issues. Māori, iwi and lived experience stakeholders
report positive engagement with us. We can see the impact of our work in three key areas,
the Access and Choice Program, the work to repeal and replace the Mental Health Act,
and the new Mental Health and Wellbeing Strategy.
The launch of the Access and Choice Program represented a major investment in mental health
and addiction. Our monitoring has provided transparency and accountability. In response
to our findings, we saw greater investment in targeted action and improvement in data quality
and visibility. Since our establishment, we have advocated for a mental health and addiction system
that places people and whānau at the centre. Central to this has been our support for the
work to repeal and replace the Mental Health Act. We support legislative and practice changes that
uphold the rights, people's rights, to make informed decisions about their care and treatment.
We have advocated for stronger recognition of mental health and wellbeing within legislation.
Our evidence-based advice made the case for a dedicated mental health and wellbeing
strategy anchored in research and shaped by the voices of people with lived experience.
Our engagement has been acknowledged and actively sought with the Minister for
Mental Health supporting our ongoing involvement in the development of the mental health and
wellbeing strategy. In the coming year ahead, our 2526 is our first year under our new strategy
and statement of intent. We have used strategic priorities focused on mental health and addiction
services for tamata whāia ora and outcomes for people with lived experience and on improving
the performance of the mental health and addiction system. We're focusing our efforts over the next
three years through making three strategic shifts on how we work, placing people with
lived experience at the centre of our work, being future-oriented, promoting alignment and
leveraging knowledge to influence positive change, and being a bold advocate.
The first Hauora Heningaro Tiara Tu Rua forum was a success with over 240 attendees. Feedback
was positive, particularly about the timely announcement regarding crisis response funding.
Most delegates surveyed found the program relevant, topical and useful.
The publication of Urupare Moreria Crisis Response Monitoring Report
was a significant milestone. Analysis of media cover showed 23 articles across major outlets
in an estimated reach of 2.8 million impressions. We published the assessment of progress
implementation of kōtimata to Haringa recommendations. This is the first time
that we have assessed progress with recommendations that we've made.
Of the five recommendations made in early 2024, three have been completed
by Health NZ and the government. Two others are then worked on.
This year, in 2026, the Minister for Mental Health will undertake a review of our
factors that was built into the legislation from the beginning and the operations of the Haringa
Mahara. Our case studies highlight the system is shifting.
We are a trusted voice in speaking up on important health,
a mental health addiction, and well-being issues. We recognise much more needs to be done
and will take time, sustained leadership and action. The new mental health and well-being
strategy and our ongoing oversight, monitoring and advocacy will be critical to seeing the change
people and whānau want to see.
Thank you. Thank you very much for that. Some questions and good lyrics.
Yeah, thank you very much and lovely to see you all. I'm interested to pick up some of the
themes that you mentioned in your introduction and clear that when you say a trusted voice,
that certainly is the perceptions in the sector. I'm curious to know some things from a systems
perspective that your commission has highlighted. One of the things we asked you about a number of
years ago was leadership in the mental health sector. I'm wanting to get a sense from you
whether you feel that the leadership is there and I'm thinking also about accountability given
that we have more agencies who are supposed to or have a statutory duty to provide some
accountability. But when we ask them all, fingers go the other way or they just isn't the
legislative teeth. And in fact, when I look, I see accountability is only really at a
contracted level, which are very output-orientated. So there's two systems levels questions
there. One is the leadership there. Secondly, are you satisfied that the
accountability are baked into the system in the way they should be around mental health?
Let me start. I think we can all probably have a bit of a go at that question. It's a big one.
In terms of leadership, we've seen some change in improvement, particularly within
Health New Zealand. And we've been able to actively engage at the governance and
operation, senior operational level. So we've seen a deficit, I suppose, of leadership in that space
that has been filled in recent times. In terms of accountability, I think there's still ways to
go. We think that the mental health and wellbeing strategy is an important one, that it has
an overlay that includes within it milestones and accountabilities that you refer to.
I can give one example of where system change leadership, we particularly paid a role in
that is in the crisis response space. There was a lack of clear leadership across the various
different agencies, police, justice and health. And we managed to fill avoid. And I think
as a result of that, there was some progress made and then governments subsequently made some
investments. So change is happening in pockets, but I would still say in terms of overall
accountability and a joint up system, we have long ways to go. And as I said in that introduction,
it's going to require time and sustained leadership for us to get there. That's a starter, but
all Karen. Thank you for that. And I guess that leads me into a pivot, if you like,
or a focus now on youth. And I know that in your latest report, we're still seeing youth having
longer wait times to access specialist services. And in fact, we're seeing longer wait times
for addiction services as well. So I'm interested to know whether the focus on youth is, whether
you're able within the current architecture to include some of the really important things like
social determinants and other elements that might make a significant difference lifting that
access and engagement. I think there's two parts to your question. In terms of this part of your question.
Sorry, can you clarify that? So the best part is around the wait times for 19 to 24 year olds.
So if we're unpacking, we're unpacking it up, that is probably the best one line statement we can
say. What we're finding for young people is the referrals are being made, but they're being
declined. And so understanding what that's about is important to us. Is that work happening? Do you
know that the tracking of the wait times? Okay, I can comment on that. So we've had a long-term
focus on rangatahi and young people looking at both what are the drivers for the increasing
rates of distress in that sort of determinant space and reported on the well-being outcomes
rangatahi and youth as well as access to services. So both is really important. So we are,
you've seen youth reflected in our crisis and other work, and we are doing a deep dive this year
to really try and understand those pathways across the system, but also the access patterns.
So what we have seen is, as Haley said, a continued decline in the numbers of young
people accessing specialist services. And there are more options in primary and community,
but we're still hearing a lot about the concerns that people have about young people not being able
to get access when they need it. So we need to understand how that whole system is working.
Oh yeah, but I want to stop on the same line. Thank you.
Just final stop, thank you for that. Last night when I asked the minister about this, he said
that people are being referred to different organizations or different specialists.
That's why there are these declines. Have you seen evidence that young people are actually
being deferred into services and receiving the treatment, or is that a statement that needs
some evidence behind it? Yeah, look, we have heard that referrals are being declined because there's
more appropriate services. And we know there are more options in those primary and community services,
particularly like the the youth stream of access and choice and other options. We don't fully understand
the detail that sits behind that, which is what we're hoping to understand more in the deep
dive that we're doing this year. So there is something happening in terms of that 18 to 24
age group who are accessing adult services. So wanting to understand what's happening within services
and why young people, that age group has continued to decline while adults has
increased. So there is something under there that we need to understand. So we're looking at it.
Which is what my sub was going to be about, is that transition from youth to adult and
being able to understand what is the gap or the blockage for that transition, if you
can have any comment on that? Yeah, look, we haven't particularly looked at that transition.
And so that is part of the work we're doing this year as part of the deep dive looking at
young people and how that transition works. Because we have heard many young people are all
different. And so for some, they may be more ready to transition into adult services. Others
might prefer to actually be continued to be supportive in the services they're currently
receiving. So that as said, that's what we're looking at this year. Right, so you're going to
create to understand what that blockage or yes, yes. And so in our work, what we do is we have
the board brush approach to monitoring. And then we highlight the areas where we need to have a
closer look. And last year, we was really clear that crisis responses was an area we needed to
have a closer look. So we did that deep dive last year. And this year, it's really having
a look at those youth services. And that's how we work as an entity is to say,
where do we need to have a closer look? And so that there's a gap in that transition.
But at the moment, yeah, that's what we need to understand more. And that's what we add
as value to the system is being able to look at those deep dives, bring some international
evidence. What is working well in New Zealand? What can we learn across the system? So
that's that's what we're doing. Thank you, Mr Chair. And thank you for being here and for your Mahi.
I know that Arangatahi have some of the worst statistics for mental health
and the OECD. And I want to talk about your advocacy role, particularly with other ministries
and ministers. So we know that the new minister stamp for its new curriculum,
particularly the health of physical education curriculum, does not mention the words mental
health at all. How have you advocated to the minister or the Ministry for Education to have
mental health within the curriculum? We haven't had any specific advocacy
when we have those relationships across government. And certainly we know that other
government entities agencies draw from from our work. And so we certainly advocate for youth voice
so for young people to have a voice and whatever changes are being proposed. But also for young
people to have greater knowledge about mental health and wellbeing, what they can do to keep
themselves well and safe. So yeah, we certainly advocate for that. Thank you, Supplementary.
And so do you think it is vital for youth and Anata to get support and understanding through
their education? At school? Yeah, this is personal response. Yes. Have we done any
particular work in a specific area where we haven't? And supplementary. And so does the Ministry
for Education or the Minister Education reached out to you for that advice? I'm not aware of that.
Thank you. And one more. If that's okay. It's okay. Thank you. So has there been any discussion
or thoughts around having a cross ministry group that meets, like the group that was set up after
Te Aurete Kura for the Prevention of Family and Sexual Violence was set up where they came
together, talked about mental health, particularly around youth for this case? Has there been any work
or thoughts around that? With the focus on education? With the focus on youth mental health?
I'm not that I'm aware of that. Do you think that, yeah? The closest piece of work that we've
been involved in there would be in the process response space. And there have been some
short term ministry-led initiatives, but not specifically on this co-poper.
There has been work across government and in previous terms of government with drawing to either
different ministers with different portfolios to focus on, so the child and youth are well-being.
Yeah. Thank you.
Very much. That's a break. Thank you.
During the year you've updated your strategy, what is the main shifts in your priorities and
what are they based on? Good question. I think a number of factors came to play. I'll start
ball rolling, but a number of factors came to play for us. One, we found our straps, I suppose,
you could say, in a startup 60 years ago. So we were clear about what our purpose was,
and we were clear about the resources that we had. The other part, of course, is that we
utilised public service to assist us in engaging with stakeholders. So we listened to a lot of
people in effect and helped shape our strategy. So knowing what we were about,
knowing the resources that we had, what we heard, that brought us into identifying
six areas to shift where from to, and I think, as carers to cover off on those three areas,
but they're quite important for us in terms of driving the decisions that we make,
or take on an elsewhere side of the organisation. So last year we did undertake what's called a
future excellence horizon, which is common across government. So we interviewed a range of stakeholders
and also conducted a survey to get feedback from people about if we were the best organisation
we could be, what that would look like. And so what we heard was that we needed to place
people's experience much more centered in our work. We needed to work to improve a fragmented system.
So we'd heard a lot about the fragmentation and the lack of leadership. We needed to lift our
profile. So we heard quite a lot about our visibility and that we needed to look ahead
and think about the demographic changes that we're happening. And so that then led into
the refocus of our strategy and our 24-25 annual report. Reports against our previous four strategic
priorities. So what we're now working to is a refined set of strategic priorities,
which is about focusing on people with lived experience, people who are using
inter-health and prediction services, so much more focused on services, continuing to have
a focus on broader well-being outcomes and determinants. And the new one is really how we
look at the performance of the mental health and addiction system. And as we've mentioned
previously, we did release our first system performance report last year. We are about
to release our second one this year in June. And that is where the six shifts that we
identified. So we said that the system needs to shift in these ways. And that's really
informed the mental health and well-being strategy. So happy to take further questions on that.
Just a quick step. In multiple of your answers, you've talked about the stakeholders. Who do you
see your stakeholders? Who do you see those people or stakeholders? Who are they?
Oh, they're really broad. We have multiple stakeholders. So of course, it's people
who have lived experience and the whānau families who support them. And that's a really broad
and diverse group. We have obligations to Māori and whānau as part of our legislation
and how we engage with Māori and whānau and prioritise equity for Māori. We have some really
important sector stakeholders. So working with people who are providing services, commissioning
services to achieve the changes that we want to see across government. We also have
stakeholders in terms of what we describe as the priority populations. So in our act,
there are a list of 12 populations who have higher prevalence of distress. And so it's
important that we connect with those groups as well. So Māori for such like young people,
veterans as they're at list. So it's a really broad group and we're a small entity of around
20 staff. So we have to really think smartly about how we connect in with
organisations that represent those populations and with the providers. So both Health New Zealand
and NGOs and other providers. So it's a big challenge for us how we keep that commission.
I appreciate you've got your priority populations. And I think last year when you're here, I did
ask about middle-aged males. They're the group that most are most likely to die by suicide.
What are you doing to reach out to stakeholders in that group?
Because I suppose one of my fears is that some of these people aren't accessing
mental health support. And so probably very hard for you to pick up because they're not
they're not engaging with services. Yeah and I think that's the relationships we have with
other agencies and organisations who are connected with those groups because it's hard for us to have
the direct reach into those communities given the nature of our organisation and our size.
So we do have you know that intentional engagement with the groups that represent.
So the rural sector or if it's Pacific peoples. So how do we have those connections and then also
more broadly like the mental health foundation and those organisations.
Hayden during your initial briefing you mentioned that case studies show that the system is shifting.
Is that in relation to these priorities or were you meaning something different?
I was referring to the areas that we've seen in the legislation. Taking up of the
strategy for mental health and well-being. Focus on youth and we're also talking about
access and choice. So those are the areas that we particularly where we've worked on where
we can see some contribution to where those areas of work have shifted.
Just to clarify the system shift you're talking about are mainly inputs in terms of
ledges sort of change and systems change rather than outcomes which would take some time to measure.
Of course. Thank you.
Thank you chair. I read your statement of intent that was published in last year July
but I couldn't find anything that talked about the needs of the FX community.
In the past five years the risk of mental health issues like depression have been
significantly increased in Asian communities. Do you think this is a serious concern that lead
more attention? Yes we do. We're not reflecting necessarily all of that work that's been done
but there's some work that's been done through Karen and the team and that will in time surface
but that's Karen's in a better position to articulate what we're doing. I mean if you
think it's a very serious concern why not a single wording or single strategies have been
addressing the needs of our Asian community? It probably reflects the fact that we weren't
there at that particular time but it's not to say you know it's it's basically saying
we're not we can't get to anything at once so but having said that we're now in a position and we
are starting to move into making connections in that particular area. So you're trying to tell me
that you don't think there's a needs for Asian community before? We knew that. You knew but
you didn't react? Well again with the small organization like trying to do the best that
we can in terms of reaching if you look at all 12 population groups that quite extensive
and require quite a lot of effort and resource to engage in in a appropriate way and follow through.
So at that particular time it wasn't we clearly weren't in a position to articulate anything.
We are in a better position to do that now. All right so what do you think are the main reason
affecting the mental health in our afflux community? Like how does the mental health and wellbeing
commission support a speaker for them? So I've had a lot of engagement particularly with
Asian family services and so we have supported the summits that Kelly and her team have hosted
both in Auckland and then the one in in Parliament so and we do look at how we reflect in Asian
communities Asian population in our substantive reports. So for example in our access and choice
report we highlighted the needs for Asian people to have access to those access and choice services
and in our other reports we also highlight one of the needs for Asian people alongside Maori
and Pacific. So we certainly have done work to connect with both Asian family services and
other key leaders from the Asian community and to reflect that in our work.
Have you removed the barrier for the Asian community to access to mental health services?
We removed the barrier. Any barrier or you just don't you just believe that there's no barrier for
for any afflux groups or Asian communities to access to the mental health service?
Well our role is to highlight what's happening in terms of access and need and then to
advocate for that and in terms of for Asian the Asian population we have been reflecting those
needs and doing that advocacy in our work and I think this does highlight the challenges
I've been said you know there are 12 priority populations and it's hard to reflect each of
those populations specifically particularly in a statement of intent which is around us as an
entity but in our substantive work we certainly do everything to bring forward those voices in
our work. If you think if you just mentioned that your main function is to advocate you know
advocate for people or give advices what advice have you given to the minister so far to address
the needs of our Asian communities and also are you happy with the result you have been
implemented in the last 12 months so far if not which areas do you think it needs to improve?
We have raised the issue with the minister we haven't got a clear pathway forward but we
have raised it as an important area that needs attention and specifically in relation to the
Access and Choice Programme and their report at the end of five years and we did highlight the
need for a service stream that was specific for our Asian population and the minister responded to
that in a positive way. Just a quick comment and then I'm going to ingrid for a suck and
Cam also has a suck. Just let you know I'm afraid this up.
How long has it been? And then Kahu has her primary.
Oh sorry was a suck. I'm actually not a primary thank you.
Quick comment. Just let you know I'm afraid this is a point of the answer you put by today
and I expect a better outcome in the next 12 months. Thank you.
Thank you for that speaking to Dr Kelly Fing it seems that one of the problems
is that you don't know what you don't know when it comes to the Asian
mental health issues and gambling in particular so first is that a piece of work that is when you
talk about the work that you're doing Karen is that what you're looking at because that baseline
has to be missing and that's probably a big part of why they don't get funding that I think Dr
Chung is alluding to is not proportionate to the problem we can't count it. The second part
is with access and choice are you aware that the access and choice solution provided by the
government is is not the same as the other strands of access and choice is convoluted and therefore
makes it really problematic for Asian communities to actually access access and choice
and if so what would you like to see done about that?
Yeah so just on that the second part I'm aware that the the solution for that
that Asian stream access and choice is different from the other streams and that reflects that
those other streams we're right from the beginning and this is a a solution to improve access
and I know that's um I haven't talked with Kelly recently but you know that some aspects of that
are quite challenging and those do need to be worked through I think ultimately it is about
people being able to access the services supports in a timely way so it is about the
specific streams and it is also about the appropriateness of all services for people who are accessing
those services um the um you know the Asian population is is made up of different types of
population as it is for Pacific peoples as well so it is how do we yeah as said have the specific
streams and services that meet everybody's needs in the most appropriate way and so is the
baselining of the how big is the problem which is a question and is difficult if the data is only
being collected from small data sets of who is accessing and what we're seeing on the ground is
a much bigger problem is that a gap in the system and is that something that you are working at all?
Yeah that goes to the prevalence study so we have advocated for a proper sort of study of the
level of need in communities and we're speaking particularly about the Asian community.
Yes well that would that would include what's the level of need for um for Asian communities as well
as other communities so the the youth stream is underway and that should give us a really good
insights into what is the level of need for um for the all of those populations and then how
can services be targeted to meet those needs and particularly for the youth does pick up um that's
part of those changing demographics so um you see that particularly in the at that age group so that
will give us some really useful information um but not only us for the whole system so we have a role
to play um but we're not the commissioners and funders of services so we're bringing that oversight so
we have views and insights and we can feed those in um I think you I think you can say that we are
increasing our presence in this area and you will have some uniformness thank you.
Cam. Oh thank you chair. Something can be true.
Chair, there's a supplementary for your primary. The questions that we've had in this light of
question in this light of question we have focused on groups of people um specifically you know
heard some some um strong advocacy and questions from um Dr Chulman Asian um Dr Campbell on middle
aged men do you think that labelling listening categorizing the way it's done in this act when
you're enabling piece of legislation is actually um making your job harder when a population is
divided up and everyone starts fighting who do you think that it's actually that the amount
of trust in what you're able to do is being impacted because of the dividing people up and
clear the breach of a social contract where we all come together to support each other.
Order you think politicians are dividing us.
Yeah look I think is it making your job easier or harder? I think it's helpful speaking to the
to be to be you know to be I think if we're looking at it from a general how we apply
up the resources that we have um that gives us recognizes that not one shoe uh or one solution
fits all so but it does provide a challenge for us to when it comes to applying that in practically
there are some challenges for us to be able to move effectively across all of those bases.
Is that because there's contradictions in the act between things like I think it's section 10 where
you can as a commission can decide populations you want to focus on but then also you've got
clause 13 schedule two with these lists of populations you have to justify um actually
looking at wider population basis like is that is this making I'm guess I'm trying to figure out
like you've heard some emotion I would say there's a lot of people who would read this legislation
and yeah you can say it's politician and say are you actually able to look at the population and
identify based on what you find what do you feel directed by to these population bases.
I had a comment because it is one of the shifts that we've made in our strategy
so when we started you know in the early period of time we did do a report focused on the well-being
outcomes for Pacific peoples to focus on a particular population group now that report was
incredibly well received by the Pacific community um but when we've looked at our resources and as
you know we're you know five million dollars and and 20 staff we and the we what we went through
with the future excellence horizon the advice was that we needed to be much more focused on people
with lived experience and people who are accessing services and so we have made a shift to um and it was
a challenging shift for us to make because we would like to be able to do a report like that on
each of the priority populations but we simply don't have the resources to enable us to do that
so we have focused on the people who are um accessing services who are using services and the
people with distress and trying to bring the voices of those different priority populations
into that work so it is hard to disaggregate because it's not that um you know you can have
people have more than one of those or can be categorized into more more than one of those
categories so it's not just a straight distinction um so it is a challenge for us that we've had
to grapple with thank you mr chair um well we know too many asian people and arty or don't feel welcome
and have um mental health and my my colleague from the national party dr callous chung um
talked about the need for culturally appropriate services and getting support populations um
who are disproportionately affected for example people living in rural areas like farmers um
when we're talking about asian family services uh it could look from the outside like they get
quite a lot of funding um through other um services um but we know that those that funding is ring
fenced for gambling um and that that means that other um mental health services um which maybe are
more needed um in different areas are not able to be funded because it is being fenced for gambling
and so my question is around that access and um peer support and what are your suggestions for
more flexible contracts um and reactive um contracts for for the need um what's your advice to funders of
um mental health services yeah and look i that generally we see a lot of our advice um that
we provide is his own debt policy makers and decision makers and we think the levers of
commissioning are really important leaders for change so we don't have our hand directly on those
levers but what we can do is shine the light by bringing information to to uh to bear so that
hopefully that influences an impossible way and i think it's important that we're not seeing
as the fixes of issues because that's just not what we're made no we're designed to do
so uh commissioning is a really important area of for change as i've said and i think the kinds
of things that you're looking for usually particularly if you want community-based responses
is high trust uh flexibility and and ten year term clear on being clear on the expectation
and clear on the outcome that you're looking for really clear steps and measures that are put in
place uh and um allowing that community to determine the best way so you're not using that
type lose type principle in clear on what you're looking for being clear and what you're measuring
and allowing that community to shape but what the response needs to be
i'll just make another comment there but in terms of the way we are looking at data or the systems
looking at data um in terms of being clearer about the impact across different ethnicities age
groups are the factors that might um play into this space it is that that's really important
to allow us to be able to look down into those various um variables about what are the presenting
needs what's the difference being made what are the things that would make a difference
for particular populations or age groups and what might we be doing about it in commissioning space
and i guess what we're seeing is um a higher level of focus on some of those different categories
which may not have been there in the past but does allow greater information and so as
access and choice and those community programs roll out we're in a better position now to see
who's getting access and who isn't and what might need to be done about that and i think that's
the area we'll be in in the next few years thank you mr chair i'd like to ask some questions which
i intended uh to get from you a model for me to better understand your um your and other mental
health data in the future i notice that your um letter of expectation includes analysis of current
resourcing against population needs to inform future areas of focus at a system level often when
we talk about health service planning we have a conceptual model of how we might measure need in
the community and therefore the service response when we read reports like the one you recently
published 202.9 percent of people age 15 to 24 experience psychological high or very high levels
of psychological distress can you please explain the conceptual model that sits behind that measurement
or tell me another measurement but the measurement of need and what the services could or should be
how do you link that so what we've used in terms of that 22.9 percent is using the health survey
results so that as you know has limitations so what what we so that's being used as a proxy to say
what what do we um what's the best information we have about the level of need but it's the
prevalence study will give us far better information about the actual level of need and prevalence
i don't want to get a quick into a discussion about on Mr Deputy Chair um if i may uh i don't
want to get a discussion about measurement and methods um what i'm asking is whatever good
measurement you use yeah how will you match that or link it to service need does every person who
reports experiencing distress need a clinical service um or not and can you explain that link to me
so what i would say is our work is um in terms of uh that system performance view is is and i'll
refer back to the system performance work as we had our first report last year which is where we're
and it might not be the one that you're referring to but we're trying to say what are the population
level outcomes for for all people and you know we're the well-being for all people in RTI
and how do you then draw connections back into the system and into the service contribution
and and there's not that direct connection through but what we're trying in terms of
attribution you know as many other factors that sit outside of the mental health system
um financial crisis um you know wars all of those things actually influences influence
people's mental health and well-being so we're trying to draw that that um connection but
the report from last year was year one um and that work will develop over time but it's trying
to develop those insights and knowledge about um where we need to do more work and to start to
paint the picture so i can um i think i understand we're trying to go with that but it's we've got
a long way to get to before we can really say what is the level of need and what is the
appropriate response be it in a all-of-government type approach in terms of improving education
employment or is it about um what are the services because it's not everybody needs a service
in that way it could be more um preventative action some of the well-being support that
can be provided so that's the complexity of what we're trying to understand